# Welcome to CEDILLEâ€™s Official Documentation

Our daily communication happens on [Discord](https://discord.gg/kX4rXRTMR6).

## Useful Links

- **GitHub**: [ClubCedille](https://github.com/ClubCedille)

- **Cluster Portal**: [Omni Sidero](https://cedille.omni.siderolabs.io/omni/)

- **Our Website**: [cedille.etsmtl.ca](https://cedille.club)

### Shortcuts

- **Tutorials**:
  [Onboarding Tracks](https://wiki.cedille.club/onboarding/tracks/)

- **Infrastructure Documentation**:
  [CEDILLE Platform](https://wiki.cedille.club/plateforme-cedille/)

- **Platform History**:
  [Origin of the CEDILLE Platform](https://wiki.cedille.club/plateforme-cedille/log791/)

## Meetings

### Scrum

We conduct weekly scrum meetings to discuss our ongoing projects, address
challenges, review the backlog, and assign available tasks to team members.
These sessions are typically followed by a coding session in our shared
classroom (D-2020).

### Workshop

Every Friday afternoon, we hold a second meeting focused on collaboration for
ongoing projects. Team members are available to assist with any issues related
to their assigned tasks, and collaboration is strongly encouraged.

### Schedule for the Fall 2025 Session

Weekly Meeting: **Wednesdays, 5:30 PM - 6:00 PM** (usually in room A-1300 or
D-2040) Workshop: **Fridays, starting at 12:00 PM** until evening

## How to Join the Club

After contacting us, you can fill out the membership form. We only accept
students after we have met with them.

- Fill out the form on
  [MonEts](https://formulaires.etsmtl.ca/ClubEtudiantAdhesion?requete=cedille&categorie=0).

- Complete the quiz on
  [Moodle](https://ena.etsmtl.ca/mod/quiz/view.php?id=1783903).

The quiz will only be available once your request has been approved.

## Project Showcase

CEDILLE hosts several websites for other clubs and applications based on their
requests. Maintaining and upgrading our hosting insfrastructure is one of our
main projects. All of our deployments for other clubs are available on our
public
[production repo](https://github.com/ClubCedille/k8s-cedille-production-v2)
under the apps folder.

Other projects include offering services like:
[Nextcloud](https://nextcloud.etsmtl.club),
[Authentik](https://auth.etsmtl.club),
[Vaultwarden](https://vaultwarden.etsmtl.club), and more...
[Services Page](https://cedille.etsmtl.ca/services/).

The documentation for each of these services is available on
[Docmost](https://wiki.etsmtl.club).

We also work on internal tools, such as:
[Trema](https://github.com/ClubCedille/trema),
[Calidum-Rotae](https://github.com/ClubCedille/calidum-rotae),
[Point-Virgule](https://github.com/ClubCedille/point-virgule).

## About this wiki

This wiki is the primary resource for our members and partners. It contains
information about our projects, services, and best practices. Whether you are a
developer, a system administrator, or an end user, we have information to help
you get acquainted with the CEDILLE platform and make the most of it.

Here, you will find detailed guides, tutorials, best practices, and answers to
your most frequently asked questions.

Our goal is to provide a simple, reliable, and high-performance hosting platform
for our clients while offering our team members an educational and enriching
development and deployment experience.
